Male White University Professor at a very SLAC in the US

I have wondered occasionally if a two-pronged approach to this issue would be effective. Writing an editorial to suggest that PIs should incorporate funding for technician seems like a good start. It also seems like it would be worthwhile to write something from the student perspective, suggesting guidelines for when they should consider taking a low-paying (or non-paying) temporary position, how to identify good opportunities, etc.

(This is an interesting idea, I have written about hwo to apply to field tech jobs, I'm not sure how I feel about writing about hwo to decide if low paid work is worth it [mostly cause I have no idea how you would be able to tell])


Female White University Professor at an R1 in the US

1) I suspect that many (most?) of your dataset probably consists of technicians recruited to help graduate students. If you make providing not only room and board but also wages sufficient to pay off student loans or supporting sick relatives a requirement, what you are saying is that the only grad students who are allowed to benefit from help in the field are students from well-funded labs and/or working on a project funded by their advisor. Many graduate students do not have access to the types of funding that permit this, yet are doing great science and being highly productive members of our scientific community, precisely because they are able to make things happen on a shoe-string. I firmly believe that PhD students should have a major role in shaping their intellectual development, designing their project, and taking ownership of the direction of their project. This is fundamentally incompatible with a funding model of PI getting a big grant and essentially hiring a PhD student to run it with the help of well-paid technicians. I think your statements that “Unpaid technician positions are bad for science. They are bad for the conservation of our natural world. They are bad for society.” …are wrong because they can make possible a degree of intellectual freedom that is crucial to inventive, original, student-driven research that con contribute substantially to the conservation of our natural world.

2) For PIs providing minimal compensation, there are undoubtedly fewer justifications. But there are some! You acknowledge that everyone has tight funding and is always looking for the way to maximize data/$. That is not going to change, ever. In a hypothetical situation where you had $3000 allocated for technician support. Let’s image that could pay 1 person well for a field season or 3 at rate where they are able to live and eat but not do such things as pay off student loans. If you chose 1 person, you’d be crazy not to  ONLY accept the most skilled, experienced people for the job. If you have the freedom to take 3, you can afford to pick people with ZERO experience, and provide a lot more training. People pay through the nose for formal classroom education. Why should they not “pay” in effect, for training?

(This makes me jump up and down about how universities are cutting field courses and undergrads aren't getting that experience)

3) The people who get the most funding are the old white guys. If only old white guys can have technicians, then we hurt the ability to creative, smart, less-advantaged people of doing science and inspiring others to make things happen for them, even if they work on a shoe-string.

Don’t get me wrong… I do understand the logic of trying to make things easier for less-advantaged students. But I think some of your arguments are a little over-stated. Take this: “How is someone—often with student debt, no outside financial support, a child, a sick parent, an expensive medical condition, any kind of regular life expense, or no family to buy a plane ticket for them—supposed to take these positions?” First, if the potential technician has a small child, a sick parent that requires their assistance, or a serious medical condition, then it is not a good idea to fly off to a remote field site, regardless of the compensation. Like it or not, remote field camps are bad places to bring infants and to be sick. It would be irresponsible of the person hiring to put a sick person or child into situations that put them at risk. What are they to do? Only ever study things within an easy drive of medical attention within North America? I also would like to see data on how much biologists are selecting from the privileged for such positions? That data probably doesn’t exist, but it is crucial to your arguments, and without data, I think it might be premature to state your conclusions so forcefully. I can’t speak for others, but I have actively sought to promote diversity from grad-student days onwards. I also can’t see how these policies affect gender or sexual orientation issues.

(people who say this doesn't impact gender don't seem to have looked at our referneces, maybe we need to do some more digging on sexual orientation, since I can't recal us having a citation for that, but I would be amamzed if it doesn't have an impact)

Person #3 (I have no idea what their background is)

My take on internships/volunteer jobs. Their role should only be reserved for undergraduates that are still working on a degree. I had no compunctions taking an internship for such low pay. I had very little experience at that point, so the internship was a way for me to learn many different skills to work as a field biologist. I've had a few people ask how I got such good experience, and as such good paying field jobs, right after college. working the right internship, that offers lots of learning opportunity, is a good way to help in that regard.

(this is the kind of general....feedback I got from several people, they seem to think its ok as long as they are students, which is just...annoying)

Faculty at V Tech (from their comments they are African American)

But look at undergraduate wildlife classes. You will see already that there are very few of us present. At NC State, I was the only AA (even just minority, I believe) in wildlife for my year (a year later, another AA woman came in). What's filtering minorities out comes before college, probably before high school. If we want to increase the diversity of our field, outreach efforts need to be concentrated towards childhood and the early teen years, and ideally, we'd have some sort of mentorship program to keep people on a track towards declaring a wildlife/related major once they enter college.

(THIS IS A VERY GOOD POINT, clearly even if we eliminate all unpaid positions today there are still many barriers to science, especially for racial minorities)

In that case (the editorial says), don't advertise for technicians. Asking for people to work for free (or even pay for the opportunity) closes the door to those who can't afford to do so. I don't disagree with that. But not offering the opportunity at *all* closes the door completely. Isn't a partially opened door better than a completely closed one, especially when a completely opened door can't occur at that time?

There should be no pay-to-volunteer opportunities and no unpaid technician positions. People should be paid. That's a future we should work towards. But in the present, international wildlife research and conservation efforts are both very vital and highly underfunded. Something's got to give. Having paid technicians and no equipment does not equal data collected. But being able to advertise for people who will pay a project fee will allow us to work on collecting the funds for equipment, local salaries and field provisions. This isn't a reality in which we can rest and stagnate; we must work towards it being better. But we have to accept reality's nuances before we can change it.

In the present, the door is partially opened: only to those who can afford to take a non-paying job, or even pay for the opportunity to volunteer with a project. The question is, how can we open the door further?

Projects that can actually afford to pay salaries should pay them.

(this is where I feel this faculty member's agument falls apart)

NOAA person  (from the email you sent me)

 I was able to do it because all accommodations (bomb shelter counts) & food were included. So I didn't make money but I made a career.

(yes, I understand that this model works for some people...we didn't say it didn't work for some people)

 a field tech:

 I'M SO HAPPY PEOPLE ARE TALKING ABOUT THIS PROBLEM! SO EXCITING TO SEE THIS! THANK YOU THANK YOU THANK YOU THANK YOU SO DAMN MUCH. YOU ARE OFFICIALLY MY FAVORITE SCIENTIST RIGHT NOW!


anonymous ass-hat

(I'm paraphrasing becuase I deleated the email)

'your career is over, no one will hire you because of this...'